**Softball** is a sport [similar](Variations_of_baseball "wikilink") to
[baseball](baseball "wikilink"), and it is played with a larger ball on
a smaller field and with only underhand pitches (where the ball is
released while the hand is primarily below the ball) permitted. Softball
is played competitively at club levels, the college level, and the
[professional level](#Professional_leagues "wikilink"). The game was
first created in 1887 in [Chicago](Chicago "wikilink") by [George
Hancock](George_Hancock_(softball) "wikilink").

There are two rule sets for softball generally: *slow pitch softball*
and *[fastpitch](fastpitch_softball "wikilink")*. Slow pitch softball is
commonly played recreationally, while women's fastpitch softball is a
[Summer Olympic
sport](Summer_Olympic_Games#List_of_Olympic_sports "wikilink") and can
be [played professionally](Women_Professional_Fastpitch "wikilink").

Depending on the variety being played and the age and gender of the
players, the particulars of the field and equipment will also vary.
While distances between bases of 60 feet are standard across varieties,
the pitcher's plate ranges from 35 to 43 feet away from home plate, and
the home run fence can be 220 to 300 feet away from home plate.[1] The
ball itself is typically in circumference, though this also depends on
specifics of the competition.

Softball rules vary in certain aspects from those of baseball. The game
moves at a faster pace than traditional baseball due to the field being
smaller and the bases and the fielders being closer to home plate.
Softball is pitched underhand from flat ground.

## History

<figure>
<img src="Chicago_Softball_Team_in_1897.jpg"
title="First photo of a softball team, Chicago, 1897" width="320" />
<figcaption>First photo of a softball team, Chicago, 1897</figcaption>
</figure>

The earliest known softball game was played in
[Chicago](Chicago "wikilink"), Illinois, on
[thanksgiving](thanksgiving "wikilink") Day, 1887. It took place at the
Farragut Boat Club at a gathering to hear the outcome of the [Yale
University](Yale_University "wikilink") and [Harvard
University](Harvard_University "wikilink")
[football](American_football "wikilink") game.[2] When the score was
announced and bets were settled, a Yale alumnus threw a boxing glove at
a Harvard supporter. The Harvard fan grabbed a stick and swung at the
rolled up glove.[3] [George
Hancock](George_Hancock_(softball) "wikilink"), a reporter there, called
out "Play ball!" and the game began, with the boxing glove tightened
into a ball, a broom handle serving as a bat. This first contest ended
with a score of 41â€“40.[4] The ball, being soft, was fielded
barehanded.[5][6]

Hancock is credited as the game's inventor for his development of a 17"
ball and an undersized bat in the next week. The Farragut Club soon set
rules for the game, which spread quickly to outsiders. Envisioned as a
way for [baseball](baseball "wikilink") players to maintain their skills
during the winter, the sport was called "Indoor Baseball".[7] Under the
name of "Indoor-Outdoor", the game moved outside in the next year, and
the first rules were published in 1889.[8]

<figure>
<img src="Indoor-baseball.JPG" title="Indoor baseball player, 1907" />
<figcaption>Indoor baseball player, 1907</figcaption>
</figure>

In 1895 Lewis Rober, Sr. of
[Minneapolis](Minneapolis,_Minnesota "wikilink") organized outdoor games
as exercise for [firefighters](firefighter "wikilink");[9] this game was
known as kitten ball (after the first team to play it), lemon ball, or
diamond ball.[10] Rober's version of the game used a ball in
circumference, rather than the ball used by the Farragut club, and
eventually the Minneapolis ball prevailed, although the dimensions of
the Minneapolis diamond were passed over in favor of the dimensions of
the Chicago one. Rober may not have been familiar with the Farragut Club
rules. [Fire Station No.
19](Fire_Station_No._19_(Minneapolis,_Minnesota) "wikilink") in
Minneapolis, Rober's post from 1896 to 1906, was listed on the [National
Register of Historic
Places](National_Register_of_Historic_Places "wikilink") in part for its
association with the sport's development.[11] The first softball league
outside the United States was organized in [Toronto,
Ontario](Toronto "wikilink"), in 1897.

The name "softball" dates back to 1926. The name was coined by Walter
Hakanson of the [YMCA](Young_Men's_Christian_Association "wikilink")[12]
at a meeting of the National Recreation Congress.[13] (In addition to
"indoor baseball", "kitten ball", and "diamond ball", names for the game
included "mush ball", and "pumpkin ball".[14]) The name softball had
spread across the United States by 1930.[15] By the 1930s, similar
sports with different rules and names were being played all over the
United States and [Canada](Canada "wikilink"). A tournament held in 1933
at the [Chicago World's Fair](Century_of_Progress "wikilink") spurred
interest in the game. By 1936, the [Joint Rules Committee on
Softball](Joint_Rules_Committee_on_Softball "wikilink") had standardized
the rules and naming throughout the United States.[16]

[Sixteen-inch softball](16-inch_softball "wikilink"), also sometimes
referred to as "mush ball" or "super-slow pitch" (although the ball is
not soft at all), is a direct descendant of Hancock's original game.
Defensive players are not allowed to wear fielding gloves. Sixteen-inch
softball is played extensively in Chicago,[17] where devotees such as
newspaper columnist [Mike Royko](Mike_Royko "wikilink") consider it the
"real" game,[18] and New Orleans. In New Orleans, sixteen-inch softball
is called "Cabbage Ball" or "batter ball" and is a popular team sport in
area elementary and high schools.

The first cork-centered softball was created in [Hamilton,
Ontario](Hamilton,_Ontario "wikilink"), Canada, by [Emil "Pops"
Kenesky](Sports_in_Hamilton,_Ontario#Innovations "wikilink").[19]

By the 1940s, fast pitch began to dominate the game. Although slow pitch
was present at the [1933 World's Fair](1933_World's_Fair "wikilink"),
the main course of action taken was to lengthen the pitching distance.
Slow pitch achieved formal recognition in 1953 when it was added to the
program of the [Amateur Softball
Association](Amateur_Softball_Association "wikilink"), and within a
decade had surpassed fast pitch in popularity.[20]

The first British women's softball league was established in 1953.[21]

The [National Softball Hall of Fame and
Museum](National_Softball_Hall_of_Fame_and_Museum "wikilink") was opened
in [Oklahoma City](Oklahoma_City "wikilink"), United States, in 1957.

In 1991, women's fast pitch softball was selected to debut at the [1996
Summer Olympics](1996_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[22] The 1996 Olympics
also marked a key era in the introduction of technology in softball. The
IOC funded a landmark bio-mechanical study on pitching during the games.

In 2002, sixteen-inch slow pitch was written out of the [International
Softball Federation](International_Softball_Federation "wikilink") (ISF)
official rules, although it is still played extensively in the United
States under [The Amateur Softball Association of
America](USA_Softball "wikilink"), or ASA rules.

The [117th meeting](117th_IOC_Session "wikilink") of the [International
Olympic Committee](International_Olympic_Committee "wikilink"), held in
[Singapore](Singapore "wikilink") in July 2005, voted to drop softball
and [baseball](baseball "wikilink") as [Olympic
sports](Olympic_sports "wikilink") for the [2012 Summer
Olympics](2012_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[23] They were reinstated for
the [2020 Summer Olympics](2020_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") held in
2021.[24]

Other sanctioning bodies of softball are AAU, NSA, PONY, [Babe Ruth
League](Babe_Ruth_League "wikilink"), [ASA](USA_Softball "wikilink"),
ISC, [USSSA](United_States_Specialty_Sports_Association "wikilink") and
Triple Crown.

## Overview

![A softball game](Softball_game.webm "A softball game") Fastpitch
softball is played between two teams on a large field, with nine players
(in 10u and above; 8u and below is usually played with ten players on a
field at once) from one team on the field at a time. Slow-pitch softball
is played with ten fielders but can be played with nine if needed.

The softball field is usually composed of a dirt or brick dust
[infield](infield "wikilink") that contains the shape and running areas
of a diamond and a grass [outfield](outfield "wikilink"). However, the
field can consist of other solid and dry surfaces such as artificial
turf or asphalt. There are four [bases](#The_field "wikilink") on the
infield: [First base](First_base "wikilink"), [second
base](second_base "wikilink"), [third base](third_base "wikilink"), and
[home plate](home_plate "wikilink"). The bases are arranged in a square
and are typically apart. Near the center of this square is the
[pitcher's circle](#The_field "wikilink"), and within the circle is the
"rubber", a small flat rectangular plate a foot and a half in length.
The rubber distance from the plate in fastpitch can be as short as 35
feet for 10u players up to 43 feet for ages 14 and older.[25] In slow
pitch softball, the rubber distance can be 43, 46 or 50 feet depending
on age level and the league one is playing in.

The object of the game is to score more [runs](#Scoring_runs "wikilink")
(points) than the other team by [batting](batting_(baseball) "wikilink")
(hitting) a ball into play and running around the bases, touching each
one in succession. The ball is a sphere of light material, covered with
leather or synthetic material. It is (or, rarely, [26]) in
circumference. The game is officiated by one or more neutral
[umpires](umpires "wikilink"). Players and umpires are generally free to
ask for a brief stoppage at any time when the ball is not in play
(called a time out), or immediately following a play once its outcome is
clear.

The game is played in usually seven [innings](innings "wikilink"). Each
inning is divided into a [top half](Inning#Baseball "wikilink"), in
which the away team bats and tries to score runs, while the home team
occupies the field and tries to record three
[outs](out_(baseball) "wikilink"); then a [bottom
half](Inning#Baseball "wikilink"), when the teams' roles are reversed.
Some leagues play with a reduced number of innings or with a time limit,
rather than the traditional seven innings.

To start play, the offense sends a
[batter](Batter_(baseball) "wikilink") to [home
plate](home_plate "wikilink"). The [batting
order](batting_order_(baseball) "wikilink") must be fixed at the start
of the game, and players may not bat out of turn. The defense's
[pitcher](pitcher "wikilink") stands atop the rubber and
[pitches](Pitch_(baseball) "wikilink") the ball towards home plate using
an underhand motion. In fast pitch, the pitcher is allowed to take one
step back prior to releasing the ball during the forward movement. The
batter attempts to hit the pitched ball with a
[bat](Baseball_bat "wikilink"), a long, round, smooth stick made of
[wood](wood "wikilink"), [metal](metal "wikilink") or
[composite](composite_material "wikilink"). If the pitcher throws three
[strikes](Strike_(baseball) "wikilink") against a batter, then the
batter is out and the next batter in the order comes up to bat. A strike
is recorded any time a batter swings at and misses a pitch or when a
batter hits a ball [foul](Foul_ball "wikilink") (out of play). A strike
is also recorded any time the batter does not swing at a
[pitch](Pitch_(baseball) "wikilink") that crosses home plate within an
area known as the [strike zone](strike_zone "wikilink"). In fast pitch,
to be within the strike zone, the pitch must cross over home plate, and
as it crosses it must be above the knees and slightly below the
shoulders (roughly the armpit or the shirt logo). The strike zone
therefore varies from batter to batter. In slow pitch, the ball must
land on a carpet or marked area behind the plate, therefore
standardizing the strike zone. A pitch outside the strike zone is a
[ball](Ball_(baseball_statistics) "wikilink"). If the batter reaches
four balls, the batter is awarded the first base in what is known as a
"walk". The umpire behind home plate is the sole arbiter of balls and
strikes. A foul ball may or may not result in a strikeout dependent upon
what association and local league rules. However,
[bunting](Bunt_(baseball) "wikilink") a foul ball does result in a
strikeout. In some associations and leagues, bunting is not allowed and
results in an out. Also, if a player has two strikes, swinging and
partially hitting the ball can result in an out if the catcher manages
to catch the tipped ball.

The batter attempts to swing the bat and hit the ball
[fair](fair_ball "wikilink") (into the field of play). After a
successful hit the batter becomes a [base runner](baserunner "wikilink")
(or runner) and must run to first base. The defense attempts to
[field](baseball_field "wikilink") the ball and may throw the ball
freely between players, so one player can field the ball while another
moves to a position to put out the runner. The defense can
[tag](tag_out "wikilink") the runner, by touching the runner with the
ball while the runner is not on a base. The defense can also touch first
base while in possession of the ball; in this case it is sufficient to
beat the batter to first base and an actual tag of the batter is
unnecessary. A runner is said to be "thrown out" when the play involves
two or more defensive players. Runners generally cannot be put out when
touching a base, but only one runner may occupy a base at any time and
runners may not pass each other. When a ball is batted into play,
runners generally must attempt to advance if there are no open bases
behind them; for example, a runner on first base must run to second base
if the batter puts the ball in play. In such a situation, the defense
can throw to the base that the lead runner is attempting to take (a
[force out](Force_play "wikilink")), and the defense can then also throw
to the previous base. This can result in a multiple-out play: a [double
play](double_play "wikilink") is two outs, while a [triple
play](triple_play "wikilink"), a very rare occurrence, is three outs.
Runners with an open base behind them are not forced to advance and do
so at their own risk; the defense must tag such runners directly to put
them out rather than tagging the base.

A ball hit in the air and caught before hitting the ground, in fair or
foul territory, puts the batter out. A fly ball is a ball hit high and
deep, a [pop fly](pop_fly "wikilink") is a ball hit high but short, and
a [line drive](line_drive "wikilink") is a ball hit close to the
horizontal. After the catch, runners must return to their original
bases; if the defense throws the ball to that base before the runner
returns, the runner is out as well, resulting in a double play. A runner
who remains on the base until the ball is touched, or returns to the
base ([tags up](Tag_up "wikilink")) after the catch, may try to advance
to the next base, at the risk of being tagged out between bases. As in
baseball, the [infield fly rule](infield_fly_rule "wikilink") applies in
some game situations to prevent the defense from recording multiple
force outs by deliberately dropping an easy catch.

Offensive strategy is mostly just to hit the ball skillfully to let the
batter reach base and advance other runners around the bases to score
runs. The count of balls and strikes indicates how aggressive the batter
should be. The offense may try to [sacrifice](sacrifice "wikilink"),
with the batter deliberately making an out in order to advance runners.
Defensive strategy is more complex, as particular situations (number of
outs and positions of base-runners) and particular batters call for
different positioning of fielders and different tactical decisions. The
defense may decide to allow a run if it can achieve one or multiple
outs.

## Playing field

![Diagram of a softball
diamond](Softball_diamond_large.png "Diagram of a softball diamond") The
playing field is divided into *fair territory* and *foul territory*.
Fair territory is further divided into the *infield*, and the
*outfield*.

The field is defined by *foul lines* that meet at a right angle at *home
plate*. The minimum length of the baselines varies classification of
play (see below for official measurements). A fence running between the
baselines defines the limits of the field; distance from home plate to
the fence varies by field. The widest part of the field is the distance
between the *foul poles*, which are erected where the foul lines meet
the fence, and are about apart depending on the length of the foul
lines.

Home plate is one corner of a diamond with *bases* at each corner. The
bases are cushions square, of canvas or a similar material, and not more
than thick. The bases are usually securely fastened to the ground. The
bases are numbered counter clockwise as first base, second base, and
third base. Often, but not always, outside first base (that is, in foul
territory) and adjacent and connected to it, there is a contrast-colored
"double base" or "safety base" intended to prevent collisions between
the first baseman and the runner. The runner runs for the foul portion
of the double base after hitting the ball while the fielding team tries
to throw the ball to the fair portion before the runner reaches the
safety base. However, not all softball diamonds have these safety bases
and they are much more common in women's softball than in men's. The
double base is required in the [U-18 Women's Softball World
Cup](U-18_Women's_Softball_World_Cup "wikilink").

The infield consists of the diamond and the adjacent space in which the
infielders (see below) normally play. The outfield is the remaining
space between the baselines and between the outfield fence and the
infield. The infield is usually "skinned" (dirt), while the outfield has
grass in regulation competitions.

Near the center of the diamond is the pitching plate, or colloquially
"rubber". In fastpitch, a circle in diameter known as the *pitching
circle* is market around the pitching plate.[27]

A field is officially required to have a warning track between from the
outfield fence. However, if the game is being played on a field larger
than required, no warning track is required before the temporary
outfield fencing.

Located in foul territory outside both baselines are two coach's boxes.
Each box is behind a line long located from each baseline.

### Official baseline dimensions

<table>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Fast pitch</p></th>
<th><p>Slow pitch</p></th>
<th><p>Wheelchair</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td><p>depending on the association and level of play</p></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

### Pitching distances

<table>
<caption>Slow pitch pitching distances</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>Adult<a href="#fn1" class="footnote-ref" id="fnref1"
role="doc-noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p></th>
<th colspan="2"><p>Youth</p></th>
<th><p>Kids</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td></td>
<td><p>13â€“19 years</p></td>
<td><p>10â€“12 years</p></td>
<td><p>7â€“9 years</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<section id="footnotes" class="footnotes footnotes-end-of-document"
role="doc-endnotes">
<hr />
<ol>
<li id="fn1"><a href="#fnref1" class="footnote-back"
role="doc-backlink">â†©ï¸Ž</a></li>
</ol>
</section>

Slow pitch pitching distances

<table>
<caption>Fast pitch pitching distances</caption>
<thead>
<tr class="header">
<th><p>colspan=2 width:5%" style="background:silver; |Adult</p></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="15%"><p>Female</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%" style="background:silver; |Under 16</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%"|</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%" style="background:silver; |12 and
under</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%"|</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%" style="background:silver; |10 and
under</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%"|</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%" style="background:silver; |8 and
under</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>colspan=2 width:5%"|Coach pitch</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

Fast pitch pitching distances

## Equipment

Equipment required in softball includes a ball, a bat (composite, metal
or wooden), gloves, uniforms and protective gear. For example, helmets
for the offensive team and a helmet, shin guards, and chest protector
for the defensive catcher. Also cleats, sliding shorts, face masks and
knee sliders may be worn for softball.

### Ball

![A modern optic yellow
softball](Yellow_softball.jpg "A modern optic yellow softball") Despite
the sport's name, the ball is not actually soft, though it does have a
lower density and greater [coefficient of
restitution](coefficient_of_restitution "wikilink") than a baseball.

The size of the ball varies according to the variety played and age of
the participants. The circumference for fastpitch for adults is (), with
a mass between , while children under 12 use a ball with a circumference
of () with a mass between . A 12-inch circumference ball is generally
used in slow pitch. (For comparison, a baseball is in circumference and
has a mass between .[28])

The ball is covered in two pieces of leather or similar synthetic
covering that are roughly the shape of a figure-8 and sewn together
along a continuous seam. The core of the ball may be made of long fiber
[kapok](Ceiba_pentandra "wikilink"), a mixture of
[cork](cork_(material) "wikilink") and [rubber](rubber "wikilink"), a
[polyurethane](polyurethane "wikilink") mixture, or another approved
material.[29]

Before 1993, white balls were standard at all levels of play. In that
year, a new, fluorescent optic yellow colored ball was first used in
college softball.[30] Yellow softballs have become the standard for all
levels of play; white balls are also still allowed, but are very
uncommon today.

In [Chicago](Chicago "wikilink"), where softball was invented, it
remains traditional to play [a variant of slow-pitch with a ball in
circumference](16-inch_softball "wikilink"). The fielders do not wear
gloves or mitts.[31] A 16-inch softball when new is rough and hard, with
hand and finger injuries to fielders frequent if they do not "give" when
receiving a ball,[32] but the ball "breaks in" slightly during a game
and continues to soften over time with continued play. A well-broken-in
ball is called a mush ball and is favored for informal "pick-up" games
and when playing in limited space, such as a city street (because the
ball does not go as far). A 16-inch ball is also used for wheelchair
softball.

### Bat

The bat used by the batter can be made of wood, aluminum, or composite
materials such as carbon fiber. Sizes may vary but they may be no more
than long, in diameter, or in mass.[33] The standard barrel diameter for
both slow pitch and fast pitch softball bats is 2 inches.[34] Many
players prefer a smaller barrel, which reduces mass and allows higher
swing speed.

Although there are a variety of bats used, there are several that are
banned due to performance enhancement. For example, with a thinner wall,
the ball recoils faster off the bat, allowing it to travel further. Many
bats may be "doctored" or "juiced" by being end loaded, shaved, or
painted. End loading of a cap refers to the addition of weight manually
placed at the end of the barrel to distribute more weight at the tip.
Shaving bats require machine use in order to remove the inner walls of
the bat to improve elasticity.[35] Lastly, illegal bats may be painted
to resemble legal ones.

### Gloves

![Fielding in
softball](Softball_player_fielding_1565486.jpg "Fielding in softball")
All defensive players wear fielding gloves, made of leather or similar
material. Gloves have webbing between the thumb and forefinger, known as
the "pocket".[36] Gloves used in softball are typically larger than the
ones used in baseball to account for the larger ball. No glove larger
than can be used in ASA (American Softball Association) sanctioned play.

While extremely rare in recreational play, there are sometimes different
size gloves for different positions on the field. Catchers and first
baseman have what is called a mitt, whose pockets are larger than other
gloves. These are more padded.[37] An outfielder's glove is smaller than
the catcher's, typically 12 inches to 13 inches for fast pitch softball
or 12 to 15 inches for slow pitch.[38] An infielder's glove is the
smallest, typically from 11.5 inches to 13 inches.[39] A pitcher's glove
is typically 11.5 to 12.5 inches for fast pitch or 11.5 to 13 inches for
slow pitch.[40]

No part of the glove is allowed to be the same color as that of the
ball, including that of its seams. Pitchers are also not allowed to have
any white on their gloves including the seams. The umpire has discretion
to determine whether any coloring on the glove interferes with or
hinders the batter from seeing the ball clearly.

### Uniform

![[Fastpitch softball](Fastpitch_softball "wikilink") batter in a helmet
with
mask](Softball_batter_1560583.jpg "Fastpitch softball batter in a helmet with mask")
Each team wears a distinctive uniform. The uniform may include a cap, a
shirt displaying team colors and the players' number, sliding
undershorts/compression shorts (optional), socks, and pants/athletic
shorts. The team is required to have all of its members wear the same
uniform.[41]

Caps, visors, and headbands are optional for female players, and have to
be the same color. Caps are mandatory for male players. A fielder who
chooses to wear a helmet or face mask is not required to wear a cap.[42]

Many players use "sliding shorts", otherwise known as compression shorts
in other sports. These can be outfitted with a pouch for fitting a
[protective cup](Jockstrap "wikilink") for male players. These shorts
also help to protect the upper thigh when sliding into a base. "Sliders"
may also be worn for similar protection. These are somewhat padded
shinguards that extend usually from the ankle to the knee of the wearer
and wrap all the way around the leg(s). They protect the shin, calf,
etc. from getting bruised or damaged while sliding into home plate and
make it much more comfortable to [slide](Slide_(baseball) "wikilink")
into the plate. Some male players use long, baseball-style pants.
However, some female players now wear a shorter version of baseball
pants.

At the back of the uniform, an Arabic numeral from numbers 0 through 99
must be visible. Numbers such as 02 and 2 are considered identical.
Also, on the back of the uniforms players' names are optional.[43]

All players are required to wear shoes. They may have cleats or spikes.
The spikes must extend less than away from the sole. Rounded metal
spikes are illegal, as are ones made from hard plastic or other
synthetic materials. High school athletes are sometimes permitted to
wear metal cleats, such as in Ohio.[44]

Many recreational leagues prohibit the use of metal cleats or spikes to
reduce the possible severity of injuries when a runner slides feet-first
into a fielder. At all youth (under 15) levels, in co-ed (the official
terminology for mixed teams) slow pitch, and in modified pitch, metal
spikes are usually not allowed.

### Protective equipment

![Catcher wearing a helmet and chest
protector](Softball_catcher_2006-04-01.jpg "Catcher wearing a helmet and chest protector")
Helmets must be worn by batters and runners. A helmet must have two ear
flaps, one on each side. Helmets and cages that are damaged or altered
are forbidden. In NCAA fastpitch softball, players have the option to
wear a helmet with or without a face mask. Most female travel ball teams
for fastpitch softball require the batter to wear a helmet with a face
mask. In male fastpitch masks are generally only used for medical
reasons.

In fastpitch, the catcher must wear a protective helmet with a face-mask
and throat protector, shin guards and body protector. Shin guards also
protect the kneecap.[45] In slow pitch, the catcher must wear a helmet,
chest protector and mask at youth levels. At adult levels, there is no
formal requirement for the catcher to wear a mask, although the official
rules recommend it. A catcher may optionally wear a body protector in
adult slow pitch.[46]

While mandatory for the pitcher in some slow pitch leagues, there is an
option to wear a face mask on the field. It is recommended in lower age
groups. It must be in proper condition and not damaged, altered, or the
like.[47] This is intended to prevent facial injuries.[48]

## Umpires

![The plate umpire often uses an indicator (sometimes called a clicker
or counter) to keep track of the
game.|upright](Counter_for_softball_and_baseball.jpg "The plate umpire often uses an indicator (sometimes called a clicker or counter) to keep track of the game.|upright")
Decisions about plays are made by [umpires](umpires "wikilink"). The
number of umpires on a given game can range from a minimum of one to a
maximum of seven. There is never more than one "plate umpire"; there can
be up to three "base umpires", and up to a further three umpires
positioned in the outfield. Most fastpitch games use a crew of two
umpires (one plate umpire, one base umpire).

Official umpires are often nicknamed "blue", because of their uniforms â€“
in many jurisdictions, most significantly ISF, NCAA and ASA games,
umpires wear navy blue slacks, a light powder blue shirt, and a navy
baseball cap. Some umpires wear a variant of the uniform: some umpires
in ASA wear heather gray slacks and may also wear a navy blue shirt;
umpires from the
[USSSA](United_States_Specialty_Sports_Association "wikilink") wear red
shirts with grey slacks; [National Softball
Association](National_Softball_Association "wikilink") (NSA) umpires
wear an official NSA white-colored umpire shirt with black pants or
black shorts; NSA fastpitch umpires wear the white NSA umpires shirt and
heather gray slacks.

Decisions are usually indicated by both the use of hand signals, and by
vocalizing the call. Safe calls are made by signaling with flat hands
facing down moving away from each other, and a verbal call of "safe".
Out calls are made by raising the right hand in a clenched fist, with a
verbal call of "out". Strikes are called by the plate umpire, who uses
the same motion as the out call with a verbal call of "strike". Balls
are only called verbally, with no hand gesture. The umpire also has the
option of not saying anything on a ball. It is understood that when he
stands up, the pitch was not a strike. [Foul
balls](Foul_ball "wikilink") are called by extending both arms up in the
air with a verbal call of "foul ball", while fair balls are indicated
only by pointing towards fair territory with no verbal call. No signal
is given for balls that are obviously foul; for closer calls that are
not borderline a signal is given.

All decisions made by the umpire(s) are considered to be final. Only
decisions where a rule might have been misinterpreted are considered to
be protestable. At some tournaments there might be a rules interpreter
or Tournament Chief Umpire (TCU) (also known as the Umpire In Chief, or
UIC) available to pass judgment on such protests, but it is usually up
to the league or association involved to decide if the protest would be
upheld. Protests are never allowed on what are considered "judgment
calls" â€“ balls, strikes, and fouls.

## Gameplay

A softball game can last anywhere from 3 to 7 *innings*, or 1â€“2 hours
depending on the league, rules, and type of softball.[49] The teams take
turns batting. Officially, which team bats first is decided by a coin
toss,[50] although a league may decide otherwise at its discretion. The
most common rule is that the home team bats second. Batting second is
also called "last at-bat". Many softball players prefer to bat second
because they feel they have more control in the last inning, since they
have the last at-bat.

In the event of a tie, extra innings are usually played until the tie is
broken except in certain tournaments and championships. If the home team
is leading and the road team has just finished its half of the seventh
inning, the game ends because it is not necessary for the home team to
bat again. In all forms of softball, the defensive team is the *fielding
team*; the offensive team is *at bat* or *batting* and is trying to
score runs.

### Pitching

Play often, but not always, begins with the umpire saying "play ball".
After the batter is ready and all fielders (except the catcher) are in
fair territory at their respective positions, the pitcher stands at the
pitching plate and attempts to throw the ball past the batter to the
catcher behind home plate. The throw, or pitch, must be made with an
underhand motion.

The pitcher throws the ball in or around the "strike zone". However, in
advanced play pitcher and catcher play a psychological game trying to
get the batter to guess where the next pitch is going and if it will be
a strike. In other instances, such as when an extremely powerful hitter
comes up to bat and they are followed by a weaker hitter, a pitcher may
deliberately walk the first batter based on the calculation that the
next batter will be an easy out. The strike zone is slightly different
in different forms of softball. A pitch that passes through that zone is
a "strike". A pitch at which the batter swings is also a strike, as is
any hit ball that lands in foul territory that is not caught out.

A pitch that is not a strike and at which the batter does not swing is
known as a "ball". The number of balls and strikes is called the
"count". The number of balls is always given first, as 2 and 1, 2 and 2,
and so on. A count of 3 and 2 is a "full count" since the next ball or
strike will end the batter's turn at the plate unless the ball goes
foul.

#### Slow pitch

![The target normally used in slow pitch softball. In some forms of slow
pitch, the pitched ball must hit the black mat behind home plate to
count as a
strike.|alt=](SlowpitchTarget.jpg "The target normally used in slow pitch softball. In some forms of slow pitch, the pitched ball must hit the black mat behind home plate to count as a strike.|alt=")
In most versions of slow pitch (including 16-inch) the pitch is lobbed
so that the ball rises above the batter's head and lands on a small
rectangular area on the ground behind the plate called "the well".
Umpires will make calls based on where the ball lands behind the plate;
a pitch landing in the well is a strike. These restrictions make it much
easier to put the ball into play and extremely difficult to use pitching
as a defensive strategy, as the physics of [projectile
motion](projectile_motion "wikilink") limit how fast a ball can be
thrown under such conditions and still be called a strike. In other
varieties of slow pitch (sometimes known as "modified"), the only
restriction is that the windmill cannot be used; thus the pitching arm
cannot be raised above the shoulder and both the wind-up and the release
must be underhand, still allowing for moderate speed and control in
pitching.

#### Fastpitch

![Fastpitch pitcher [Megan Gibson](Megan_Gibson "wikilink") pitching the
ball in the "windmill"
motion](Pitching_3.jpg "Fastpitch pitcher Megan Gibson pitching the ball in the "windmill" motion")
For fastpitch softball, the traditional pitching style is a "windmill"
motion, extending the arm above the body and releasing the ball at about
hip level at maximum speeds. Strength acquired in the underhand windmill
motion is based on the open-to-close hip motion.

Pitches may reach high speeds. In girls' fastpitch, depending on the age
group, pitchers can throw from or more. The fastest pitch ever recorded
was at by Monica Abbott on June 16, 2012.[51] At the [1996 Summer
Olympics](1996_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") one pitch reached .[52] Male
pitching can reach speeds around . To compare, MLB players average
around but can reach speeds up to .[53] Although slower than baseball
pitches, the shorter pitching distance in fastpitch results in batters
having a comparable time to react to a pitch as in baseball.

Throwing fastballs for speed is not always the most important factor in
fastpitch softball. Pitchers can throw breaking balls that move late in
their flight, fooling batters into swinging at pitches outside the
strike zone or, conversely, not swinging at pitches that pass through
the strike zone. These include balls that break inwards (screwball) and
outwards (curveball) on right-handed batters, starting off the plate and
moving into the strike zone or starting towards the strike zone and
moving off the plate. There are also riseballs that break upwards,
frequently starting in the strike zone and ending above it, and
dropballs that break downward. Another common pitch is the change-up, an
intentionally slow pitch that initially appears to be a fastball,
causing the batter to swing too early and miss or foul off the pitch.
Rarer is the knuckleball, which moves slowly and erratically. Pitchers
use deception as a primary tactic for getting batters out as the
reaction times are approximately half a second or less. At higher levels
of play, pitchers aim for the inner and outer corners of the plate when
throwing fastballs and breaking pitches. Pitchers also vary the location
of the pitch by height to make hitting the ball even harder for the
batter. Pitchers also throw knuckleballs which are generally slower and
move erratically.

A "crow hop" is an illegal pitch that occurs when the pitcher pushes
with the pivot foot from somewhere other than the pitching plate. This
often involves jumping from the pitching plate and replanting somewhere
in front of the pitching plate. For an illegal pitch, the umpire extends
his left arm straight out to the side and clenches his fist. This
results in a ball being awarded to the batter, and any runners on base
advancing to the next base. If the batter swings at the pitch that is
deemed illegal and puts the ball in play, the offense is given the
option to accept the results of the play or accept the penalty listed
previously (exception: if the play results in the batter and any runners
all advancing at least one base, the play stands and no option is
given). The image to the right demonstrates a legal pitch as the
push-off foot has not left the ground. The ball must be released
simultaneously with the lead leg step.

### Batters

![A batter swings at a
pitch](Softball_batter_vh.jpg "A batter swings at a pitch") The
offensive team sends one "batter" at a time to home plate to use the bat
to try to hit the pitch forward into fair territory. The order the
players bat in, known as the "batting order", must stay the same
throughout the game. Substitutes and replacements must bat in the same
position as the player they are replacing. In co-ed, male and female
batters must alternate.

The batter stands facing the pitcher inside a "batter's box" (there is
one on each side of the plate to compensate for either right- or
left-handed batters). The bat is held with both hands, over the
shoulder, and away from the pitcher (90-degree angle). The ball is
usually hit with a full swinging motion in which the bat may move
through more than 360 degrees. The batter usually steps forward with the
front foot, the body weight shifts forward, as the batter simultaneously
swings the bat. A [bunt](bunt_(baseball) "wikilink") is another form of
batting. There are different types, including a [sacrifice
bunt](sacrifice_bunt "wikilink"), or [slap bunt](slap_bunt "wikilink").
There is also regular slapping in which a batter takes position on the
left side of the plate and usually stands in the back of the box, but it
is possible form anywhere. The batter takes a step back with their
leading foot as the pitcher is in the middle of the windup, crosses over
with their back foot and runs toward first base while they swing. There
are many different types of slapping and they all vary depending on the
batter and their strengths. There are half swing slaps, fake slaps, and
full swing slaps. Each type of slap has a different purpose or goal. No
matter what way the batter hits the ball, they *must* be inside the
batter's box when the bat makes contact with the ball. If the batter
steps out of the box while swinging, the batter is out.

Once the ball is hit into fair territory, the runner must try to advance
to first base or beyond. While running to first base, the batter is a
"batter-runner". When she safely reaches first (see below) she becomes a
"base-runner" or "runner".

A batted ball hit high in the air is a "fly ball". A fly ball hit upward
at an angle greater than 45 degrees is a "pop fly". A batted ball driven
in the air through the infield at a height at which an infielder could
play it if in the right position is a "line drive". A batted ball which
hits the ground within the diamond is a "ground ball". If a batted ball
hits a player or a base, it is considered to have hit the ground.

A batter can also advance to first if hit by the pitch. If a batter is
hit by the pitch it is a dead ball and she is rewarded first base. She
must make an attempt to get out of the way and it is the umpire's
judgmental call whether the batter attempted to move. If he feels the
batter could have moved and avoided getting hit he or she will not
reward the batter first base and the pitch will be recorded as a ball.

### Getting the batter out

![A batter striking out](UT_softball_2007.jpg "A batter striking out")
The batter is out if: the batter accrues three strikes (a "strikeout");
a ball hit by the batter is caught before touching the ground (a
"flyout"); the batter goes to a base that is already tagged ("tagged" or
"tag play"); a fielder holding the ball touches a base which is the only
base towards which the batter may run before the batter arrives there (a
"force out" or "force play"); or in certain special circumstances. There
is also a not so common occurrence when the batter has two strikes and
swings at strike three. If the catcher does not catch the ball, the
batter has the chance to run to first base and the catcher can throw the
batter out at first base.

### Advancing around the bases

![A baserunner attempting to slide into home plate is tagged out by the
catcher.](Marist_Red_Fox_catcher_Sarah_Carmody_(5),_Army_Black_Knights_outfielder_Ali_Cleinmark_(11).jpg "A baserunner attempting to slide into home plate is tagged out by the catcher.")
If the player hits the ball and advances to a base without a fielding
error or an out being recorded, then that is called a "base hit". The
bases must be reached in order counterclockwise, starting with first
base. After hitting the ball the batter may advance as many bases as
possible. An advance to first base on the one hit is a "single", to
second base is a "double", to third base is a "triple", and to home
plate is a "home run". Home runs are usually scored by hitting the ball
over the outfield fence, but may be scored on a hit which does not go
over the fence. A home run includes any ball that bounces off a fielder
and goes over the fence in fair-territory (depending upon association
and local league rules) or that hits the foul pole. If a batted ball
bounces off a fielder (in fair territory) and goes over the fence in
foul territory, or if it goes over the fence at a location that is
closer than the official distance, the batter is awarded a double
instead.[54]

If a runner becomes entitled to the base where another runner is
standing, the latter runner must advance to the next base. For example,
if a player hits the ball and there is a runner on first, the runner on
first must try to advance to second because the batter-runner is
entitled to first base. If the batter reaches first base without being
put out, then that player can then be forced to run towards second base
the next time a ball is driven into fair territory. That is because the
player must vacate first base to allow the next batter to reach it, and
consequently can only go to second base, where a force out may be
recorded.[55]

Runners may advance at risk to be put out: on a hit by another player;
after a fly ball has been caught, provided the player was touching a
base at the time the ball was first touched or after; or (in fastpitch)
automatically, when a pitch is delivered illegally.[56]

Runners advance without liability to be put out: when a walk advances
another player to the runner's current base; or automatically in certain
special circumstances described below.[57]

In the recent years, the NCAA rules[58] changed when concerning the
batters feet while in the box. The rule now states that as long as any
part of the batter's foot is in the box the ball will stay live. It is
not until the batter's entire foot is out of the box, that the play will
be declared dead and the batter called out. The SEC (college ball),
however, claims that if any part of the batter's foot is out of the box
when she makes contact, she is out and the play is dead.

#### Special circumstances

If there is a "wild throw" (or "overthrow") in which the ball goes out
of the designated play area, each runner is awarded two bases from the
last base touched at the time of the throw. Retreating past a made base,
negates the advance to that base. If a fielder intentionally carries a
ball out of play, two bases are awarded from the time the ball leaves
the field of play. If this is unintentional (fielder's momentum), the
award is one base. If on a tag play, the fielder loses control (after
establishing control) of the ball and it leaves the field of play, one
base is awarded.[59]

If there is a "wild pitch" in which the ball goes out of the designated
play area, each runner is awarded one base from the base occupied at the
time of the pitch.

In fastpitch, runners may try to steal bases by running to the next base
on the pitch and reaching it before being tagged with the ball. The
point at which a runner can steal a base varies. In fastpitch, the
runner is allowed to begin stealing a base when the ball is released
from the "windmill" pitching motion, but until recently, stealing was
forbidden in slow pitch because a runner has the opportunity to get a
larger head start while the slow pitch is making its way to the batter.
As a result of rule changes initiated by the Independent Softball
Association which later made its way to the Amateur Softball Association
and the International Softball Federation in the 21st century, most
levels of slow pitch permit stealing bases, provided the runner starts
when the ball either touches the ground or crosses the plate. This rule
encourages pitchers to be more responsible with the pitch and catchers
to play defense, as balls which miss the catcher are now grounds to have
stolen bases.[60]

No matter what level of play, all baserunners must keep one foot on a
base until the pitcher throws the ball or until the ball crosses the
front edge of home plate (depends on association).[61]

In fastpitch, if the catcher drops strike three (a "passed ball") with
no less than two outs, the batter can attempt to run to first base if
first base is unoccupied. The catcher must then attempt to throw the
ball to first base ahead of the runner. If he or she cannot, the runner
is safe. With two outs, the batter can attempt to run to first whether
or not it is already occupied.[62]

Depending on the league in slow pitch only a foul ball with two strikes
on the batter means the batter is out. Stealing in 16-inch softball is
severely restricted, as a runner may only steal the base in front of
them if it is open, and if they are thrown at, *Ã  la* pickoff move or
snap throw. This results in many inexperienced players being thrown or
doubled off when they attempt to advance on a wild pickoff at another
baserunner.[63]

### Scoring runs

![A collision at home plate â€” the player in red scores as the catcher
has failed to secure the
ball.](Softball_home_plate_collision_-1507299.jpg "A collision at home plate â€” the player in red scores as the catcher has failed to secure the ball.")
A "run" is scored when a player has touched all four bases in order,
proceeding counterclockwise around them. They need not be touched on the
same play; a batter may remain safely on a base while play proceeds and
attempt to advance on a later play.[64]

A run is not scored if the last out is a force out or occurs during the
same play that the runner crosses home plate. For instance, if a runner
is on third base prior to a hit, and he or she crosses home plate after
an out is made, either on the batter or another runner, the run is not
counted.[65]

### Ending the game

The team with the most runs after seven innings wins the game. The last
(bottom) half of the seventh inning or any remaining part of the seventh
inning is not played if the team batting second is leading.

If the game is tied, play usually continues until a decision is reached,
by using the international tie-breaker rules. Starting in the top of
first extra inning, the batting team starts with a baserunner on second
base, which is the player who is the last available to bat (in other
words, the batter who last took their position in the batter's box;
regardless whether they were the last out or another runner was put
out).

In games where one team leads by a large margin, the [run ahead
rule](mercy_rule "wikilink") may come into play in order to reduce any
potential embarrassment of weaker teams. In fastpitch and modified
pitch, a margin of 15 runs after 3 innings, 10 after 4, or 7 after 5 is
sufficient for the leading team to be declared the winner. In slow
pitch, the margin is 20 runs after 4 innings or 15 after 5 innings.[66]
In the [NCAA](National_Collegiate_Athletic_Association "wikilink"), the
required margin after 5 innings is 8 runs. The mercy rule takes effect
at the end of an inning. Thus, if the team batting first is ahead by
enough runs for the rule to come into effect, the team batting second
has their half of the inning to narrow the margin.

A game may be lost due to a "forfeit". A score of 7â€“0 for the team not
at fault is recorded (generally one run is awarded for each inning that
would have been played). A forfeit may be called due to any of these
circumstances: if a team does not show up to play; if one side refuses
to continue play; if a team fails to resume play after a suspension of
play ends; if a team uses tactics intended to unfairly delay or hasten
the game; if a player removed from the game does not leave within one
minute of being instructed to do so; if a player that cannot play enters
the game and one pitch has been thrown; if a team does not have, for
whatever reason, enough players to continue; or if after warning by the
umpire, a player continues to intentionally break the rules of the game.
This last rule is rarely enforced as players who break rules after being
warned are usually removed.

The plate umpire may suspend play because of darkness or anything that
puts players or spectators in danger. If four innings have been played
and a team is in the lead, the game is recorded as it stands. If fewer
than four innings have been played, the game is not considered a
"regulation" game. Games that are not regulation or are tied when
suspended are resumed from the point of suspension. If it is a
championship game, it is replayed from the beginning. Team rosters may
be changed.

## Positions

![Playing positions for fast pitch
softball](Softball_Diagram_with_Players_Placement.svg "Playing positions for fast pitch softball")
There are nine players out on the field at one time in fastpitch
softball and 10 players in slow-pitch softball. Although the pitcher and
catcher have the ball the most, each person has a specific job. In the
infield there is the pitcher, catcher, first baseman, second baseman,
shortstop, and third baseman. In the outfield there is a left fielder,
center fielder, and right fielder. In slow-pitch softball there is an
extra outfielder in the outfield, who is specified as a roamer or rover.
Normally, the defensive team will play with four outfielders, meaning
there is a left fielder, left-center fielder, right-center fielder, and
right fielder. The recent trend with tournament and league slow pitch
softball play is to field five infielders instead of four outfielders.
The extra infielder is commonly placed behind the pitcher on either side
of second base.

### Pitcher

The [pitcher](pitcher "wikilink") is the individual who throws the ball
from the middle of the diamond. As in baseball, fastpitch softball has a
rubber used to control the pitchers delivery. A pitcher must have both
feet on the rubber at the start of their delivery but neither foot is on
the rubber when the ball is released. In baseball, the rubber is on a
mound of dirt as gravity is used to generate speed. In softball, the
pitchers throw from within a circle and the rubber in the circle is not
elevated. The circle is also used to control base runners. When the
pitcher is in possession of the ball in the circle, a runner who has
passed a base must either advance or return to the base. They cannot
"bait" the pitcher to throw or they will be called out. The pitcher
tries to throw the ball in the [strike zone](strike_zone "wikilink"). In
order to do that, they start while having the ball in their glove, they
throw their arms behind their hips, they shoot forwards with their leg,
which is on the same side as their glove, and leave their glove hand
there and the other arm goes around the shoulder, bends the elbow, and
turns their wrist toward the third baseman, and brings their arm through
at the end, flicks their wrist, (which affects the ball's speed, spin
and subsequent motion), and brings the arm up, with the hand by their
shoulder. They follow through with their legs turning their pitching
stance into a fielding stance. They try to release the ball when they go
past their hips. In softball, the pitcher uses an underarm motion to
pitch the ball towards the strike zone. As soon as the pitcher makes a
throw, the fielders are ready to field balls that are hit in the middle
of the diamond.[67] Pitchers usually tend to be tall, very flexible and
have good upper body strength. Pitchers can be righthanded or
lefthanded. The softball pitcher makes a windmill motion while throwing
underhand, unlike baseball pitchers who throw overhand.

### Catcher

The [catcher](catcher "wikilink") is normally behind home plate in a
[squatted position](squatted_position "wikilink") (some plays may
require the catcher to stand at an angle for intentional walks). At the
plate the catcher is responsible for catching pitches, keeping
mispitched balls in front of the plate, calling pitches that are
normally done through hand signals, picking off runners, and they are
considered the leaders of the field. Catchers must know how many outs
there are, the number of strikes and balls on the batter so they can
relay that to their teammates. They must also know how many runners are
on base and where the ball should be thrown next in the following play.
Catchers are strong, need to be smart and quick on their feet, and have
accurate throws so they can pick runners off at each base. Catchers
should be able to have strong and muscular legs to squat for a long
period of time. The gear worn by a catcher protects them from balls
thrown in the dirt or wild pitches. The catcher is allowed to take off
his/her mask to catch a pop fly or to watch the play.

### First baseman

The [first baseman](first_baseman "wikilink") is the position to the
left side of the diamond when facing home plate. The major role of the
first baseman is to receive throws from other defensive players in order
to get a [force play](force_play "wikilink") at first base. Another role
they play is to make fielding plays on all balls hit towards first base.
The first baseman is usually involved in every play that occurs on the
field. Individuals at first base have quick hands and good reach, and
are always on the lookout to catch the player off base. They are also
generally taller and [left-handed
throwing](First_basemen#Left-handed_throwing_first_basemen "wikilink"),
which gives them an extended reach. First basemen however, can be both
left- and right-handed. Just like the catcher, first basemen [may wear
specific first base mitts](#Gloves "wikilink"), usually having a longer
web allowing them to reach the taller throws over their head.

### Second baseman

The [second baseman](second_baseman "wikilink") plays in between the
first baseman and second base itself, usually closer to second base. If
the ball is hit to the left side of the field, the second baseman covers
second base. If the ball is hit to right-field or center field, they
become the cut-off for the center fielder or the right fielder depending
who the ball was hit to. If the ball is hit to the first baseman, the
second baseman then is responsible for covering first. If the ball is
hit to the second baseman, they either throw the ball to second if there
was already a player on first, or they throw to first if there was
nobody on. If there is a runner on first and the person up to bat hits
the ball to the shortstop or the third baseman, the second baseman is in
charge of covering second to receive the throw from the shortstop or
third baseman. Then, depending where the runner is between home and
first, the second baseman makes the decision to throw the ball to first
or to hold the ball. Also, in the case of a bunt, the second baseman
must cover first as the first baseman runs to get the ball from the
bunt, then it is often thrown back to first base.

### Shortstop

The [shortstop](shortstop "wikilink") fields all balls hit to the
infield between the second and third bases. This individual also helps
cover second and third bases, is frequently involved in [force
plays](force_play "wikilink") and [double
plays](double_play "wikilink"), and often throws the ball to the catcher
to throw out runners at home plate. On steals to second base (when the
runner from first is advancing to second on the pitch) the shortstop
usually covers. The shortstop does not cover second base only when a
right-handed batter is up. In this case, the second baseman covers the
steal. Most shortstops are very quick, agile and think fast. Shortstops
may play in a restricted zone but are faced with many types of hits and
interact closely with the second base, third base and home plate. Often
double plays are due to quick thinking/reaction by the shortstop. When a
ball is hit up the middle and the shortstop catches it, they will flip
the ball to the second baseman for the best result. Shortstop also takes
the cut off for the left field when the play is at second base. When the
ball is hit to the right side of the outfield, the shortstop then covers
second base. If there is a runner on first base and there is a hit down
the line or in the gap to right field, the shortstop will then go for
the cut to third. Meaning the runner that is going from first to second
will most likely be advancing to third, and in that case, the shortstop
will be the cut off for the throw from right field to third base.[68]
Shortstop can be one of the most difficult positions to play due to the
number of balls being hit in that direction.

### Third baseman

The [third baseman](third_baseman "wikilink") is the position on the
right side of the diamond when you are facing home plate. They are
responsible for fielding all balls hit their way including bunts. In
fact, the third baseman fields more bunts than a pitcher and first
baseman do. Third base is also called the "Hot Corner" because the ball
can pop off the bat at the fielder very fast. Third baseman must have
great reflexes and be very quick on their feet because not only to they
need to be quick to field a bunt but also if they are unable to predict
whether the batter will bunt or hit, a ball that is hit may be a line
drive to the face. It also helps if they can run fast but it is not a
requirement. A third baseman must have a very strong arm so that they
can throw a runner out from across the diamond. Any ball that the third
baseman can get, they should. They will have more momentum towards first
base when fielding the ball than a shortstop. They are also closer to
first base when they cut off a slower ground ball towards shortstop.
Third baseman are responsible for covering third base at all times
unless the ball is hit to them. In that instance, the shortstop is
responsible for third base. Third baseman must be smart, have great
reflexes, have a strong accurate arm, and be quick with their hands.

### Outfielders

The [outfielders](outfielders "wikilink") are players that cover the
grassy area behind the infield. Outfielders are named for their
positions in the field relative to home plate. Traditional outfield
positions include a left fielder, a center fielder, and a right fielder.
Each player has a specific job as being an outfielder.

#### Right fielder

The right fielder's position is on the right side of the field, in the
opening between the first and second basemen, when looking at the field
from behind home plate. The right fielder is part of a group of two
other fielders that make up the outfield. The right fielder has a
multitude of jobs over the course of a softball game. Generally,
outfielders act as a back-up to the infielders when they make plays or
if the ball is hit past the infield. Right field has a particular job of
covering the area behind first base if the ball is to be thrown in that
area. Right field is meant to cover this area if the ball gets past the
first baseman. This will prevent base-runners from advancing to unwanted
bases. Traditionally in the game of softball, the right fielder will
have the strongest arm out of the two other outfielders. The right
fielder must have the strongest arm because they have the furthest
possibility to throw the ball. A right fielder will throw the ball to
each base more than the other outfielders will because of their position
in respect to the bases.

#### Center fielder

The center fielder's position is in the middle of the outfield directly
behind second base when looking at the field from behind home plate. The
center fielder is part of a group of two other fielders that make up the
outfield. Center fielders technically serve as the "captains" of the
outfield. They are and should be the most vocal in effectively
communicating with their outfielders. Since the outfielders are further
apart from each other, it can be hard to hear each other. The center
fielder covers the area behind second base if the ball is going to be
thrown in that direction. By covering this area, if the ball does get
past the infielder, the center fielder can prevent base-runners from
advancing to unwanted bases. Within the game of softball, the center
fielder is traditionally the fastest of the three outfielders. The
center fielder needs to be the quickest because of the large area of
field they must cover. Besides being a quick player, the center fielder
must have a strong throwing arm because of the distance between the
player and home plate.

#### Left fielder

The left fielder's position is on the left side of the outfield behind
the third baseman when looking at the field from behind home plate. The
left fielder is part of a group of two other fielders that make up the
outfield. Generally, outfielders act as a back-up to the infielders when
they make plays or if the ball is hit past the infield. The left fielder
must field their position, but also cover the area behind third base if
a ball is thrown or hit in that direction. The left fielder covers this
area in the case that the ball will pass the infielders. The left
fielder can then prevent the base runner from advancing to unwanted
bases. Besides covering certain areas of the field, the left fielder
must be the smartest of the outfielders. In the left field position, the
player has full view of the field, the players, the base-runners, and
the batter. The left fielder must constantly be aware of the situation
on the field and know what must be done in different circumstances. More
advanced levels require the left fielder to be able to field the ball
during "slap hit" situations by playing shallow. Left fielders must also
play a role in any run down situation between third base and home plate
or back up any plays that happen at third base in case of an overthrow.

### Designated player

In fastpitch softball, it is common for teams to use a designated player
in the lineup; this player, which functions like the [designated
hitter](designated_hitter "wikilink") in baseball, hits in place of one
of the position players but does not play defense.

Unlike a designated hitter, a designated player can also become a
temporary defensive substitute, and the player substituted by the
designated player can return to their original position at a later point
in the game. However, the only player that can be substituted as an
offensive replacement (pinch runner or pinch hitter) is the defensive
player the designated player originally replaced, known as the "flex".

At any time, the designated player can be substituted back into the
lineup in the place of the flex player, but once taken out, the
designated player cannot take the place of any other player in the
lineup.[69]

#### Short fielder

In some leagues and organizations, four outfield players are utilized by
each team. The extra outfielder is sometimes called the short fielder
and plays somewhere behind second base, adjusting position based on the
handedness or other characteristics of the batter, while the regular
center fielder plays a considerably deeper position. The short fielder
used as such can take away a batting strategy in softball, which is to
hit soft liners over the pitcher.

However, some teams prefer to use the fourth outfielder like the others,
with the center field position being shared between two players known as
the left-center fielder and the right-center fielder. In this case the
four outfielders are spaced equidistantly and play at roughly the same
depth.

## Recreational play

### Types of leagues

![Handshakes at the conclusion of a championship game in a co-ed
recreational league, as seen in New Jersey in
1997.](Exxon_Intramural_Softball_League_-_SU&P_vs_Defectors_-_Field_2_-_handshakes_after_Championship_Game_-_12_Aug_1997.jpg "Handshakes at the conclusion of a championship game in a co-ed recreational league, as seen in New Jersey in 1997.")
It is estimated that 14.62 million Americans played at least one game of
softball during the spring of 2015.[70] It is played by men and women
both recreationally and competitively.

Softball is especially popular as a recreational activity for adults.
Leagues for such play are often characterized as either "fun leagues",
in which the outdoor exercise and player camaraderie is more important
than the final result, or "serious leagues". The distinction is not
absolute and there can be gradations within each. Softball teams are
often organized around groups of employees who play in the early evening
after work in the summer. In many US cities, adult softball teams are
organized by bars and clubs, hence the popular term "[beer
league](beer_league "wikilink")" softball. The teams can be men's,
women's or co-ed, and skill levels can range from novice to elite, with
league composition reflecting that. These leagues are typically either
slow-pitch or modified.

Co-ed recreational leagues, where men and women play on the same team,
generally have provisions to keep men from dominating the game. League
rules may stipulate that there must be an equal number of men and women
on the team, or that batting order alternate male and female
batters.[71] Some leagues only require three women to play but they must
be present on the field at all times. Others will allow a game to
proceed when a team does not have the requisite number of women
available but charge the batting team with an automatic out whenever the
missing woman's place in the batting order comes up.

### Modification of rules

![Recreational game in progress, New Jersey,
1996](Exxon_Intramural_Softball_League_-_Defectors_vs_Offbase_-_Field_2_-_28_Aug_1996.jpg "Recreational game in progress, New Jersey, 1996")
One reason for the popularity of softball is the ease of modification of
its rules, thereby allowing the game to be adapted to a variety of skill
levels. For example, in some slow pitch softball leagues a batter starts
at bat with a count of one ball one strike. In some leagues, the number
of home runs that can be hit by a team are limited. In other leagues,
stealing of bases is prohibited. Some groups allow for a more defensive
game by making home plate a force out for first base. This reduces
scoring evenly on both sides, and allows for some margin of error.

Co-ed leagues sometimes adopt live-play rules intended to reduce gender
inequality, under the assumption that men will be generally more
powerful. In most co-ed or mixed gender leagues there is something
called an encroachment line. This requires the outfielders to stay
behind a line till the ball is hit. If an outfielder passes in front of
this line before the female batter hits a fair ball, the batter will
receive a single base or the result of the play, and the base runners
will advance accordingly. The line will be 180 feet from home plate.[72]
One possible rule requires male batters to "switch hit".[73] Some
leagues even use different balls for male and female batters.[74] While
these modified rules are common, there are questions as to their place
in modern adult sports.[75]

Some leagues require teams to use limited flight softballs. These
softballs, when hit, will not go as far as regular softballs. Other
leagues limit the number of runs which can be scored in an inning. Five
is a common limit.

By allowing these and other modifications, softball can be enjoyed by
children, teenagers, and adults. Senior leagues with players over the
age of 60 are not uncommon.

An example of a rule modification is the "offensive pitcher" (or "self
pitch") often found in informal games where the emphasis is on the
social rather than the competitive aspects of the game. The pitcher aids
the batter by attempting to give the easiest pitch to hit. There are no
walks, and a batter is normally given a fixed number of pitches to
attempt to hit (usually 3 or 4). The batter is considered to strike out
if the batter fails to hit the ball into fair territory after the given
number of pitches. The pitcher does not act as a fielder, and a rule is
often made that if a batted ball touches the pitcher, the batter is out.

In some leagues the number of pitches to walk or strikeout can be
reduced. For instance, one strike is an out, and two balls is a walk.
This is common in leagues where doubleheaders are played, or in late
season leagues when reduced daylight is an issue. It results in shorter
games, as players are more apt to swing, even at marginal pitches,
rather than risk striking out on one pitch.

Many leagues also include a second first base immediately adjacent to
the main one. This is usually orange and the batter running through
first base is supposed to run straight through it. This minimizes the
chances of a collision. By the same token some leagues have an alternate
home plate and rule that plays at home are always force plays. In these
cases there is typically a white line drawn approximately 1/3 of the way
down the baseline that is considered a point of no return. This is
designed to reduce the "Pickle" which can put a great strain on the
ankles and knees of older baserunners.

### Indoor play

Despite the fact that it was originally intended to be played indoors,
softball is usually played outdoors. The indoor form is sometimes called
[Arena Softball](Arena_Softball "wikilink"). Indoor softball has
generally the same rules as outdoor softball. Only the wall behind the
batter is considered foul territory. The other walls are considered
fair. Usually, there is a small area on one of the walls in the outfield
that results in a home run being awarded if the batted ball hits it.
Pitching is generally a little slower because of the indoor turf, or
pitched through a pitching machine at younger levels. There is no limit
to the number of batters a team may have available, although only so
many can bat in one inning. Some indoor facilities do not allow the use
of metal cleats on the field, which are what players at the age of 14
and up generally use. Also, some tournaments may require a time limit
for games. [INDOOR SOFTBALL
RULES](https://hubsportsboston.com/league-rules/indoor-softball-rules)

## Pitch

![Unlike in baseball, softball pitches are thrown in an underhand
style.](Emma_Johnson_KSU.jpg "Unlike in baseball, softball pitches are thrown in an underhand style.")
In softball, a **pitch** is the act of [throwing](throwing "wikilink") a
[softball](#Ball "wikilink") toward home plate to start a play. All
pitches are thrown from below the waist in an underhand motion. The
phases of throwing include the grip, stance, windup, stride, release and
follow through.

[Pitchers](Pitcher "wikilink") throw a variety of pitches, each of which
has a slightly different velocity, trajectory, movement, hand position,
wrist position and/or arm angle. These variations are introduced to
confuse the batter in various ways, and ultimately aid the defensive
team in getting the batter or baserunners out. To obtain variety, and
therefore enhance defensive baseball strategy, the pitcher manipulates
the grip on the [ball](#Ball "wikilink") at the point of release.
Variations in the grip cause the seams to "catch" the air differently,
thereby changing the trajectory of the ball, making it harder for the
batter to hit.[76][77][78][79][80][81][82][83]

The selection of which pitch to use can depend on a wide variety of
factors including the type of hitter who is being faced; whether there
are any base runners; how many outs have been made in the inning; and
the current score.

### Signaling

The responsibility for selecting the type of pitch is traditionally made
by the [catcher](catcher "wikilink") by relaying hand signals to the
pitcher with the fingers. In more advanced play, coaches may give signs
to batters and/or runners to initiate special plays in certain
situations. A catcher may signal to a position player that they will be
trying to throw the runner out. A runner on base may see the pitch sign
given by the catcher and hint it to the batter using hand or body
motions.

### Pitching styles

![Pitching in softball involves various
styles.](UCSD_Softball_158.jpg "Pitching in softball involves various styles.")
The [International Softball
Federation](International_Softball_Federation "wikilink") (ISF)
recognizes three pitching styles:

-   [fastpitch](Fastpitch_softball "wikilink")
-   "modified" fastpitch
-   [slowpitch](#Pitching "wikilink")

#### Fastpitch style

The pitching distance can range between 35 feet for younger players and
43 feet for older players. Collegiate and international level pitchers
pitch from 43 feet. Pitches can travel at speeds of more than .

-   *Windmill or "Full-windmill"*


\- The pitcher begins with her arm at the hip. Then she brings the ball
in a circular motion over the head, completes the circle back down at
the hip, and snaps the hand.

-   *Figure 8*


\- The ball is not brought over the head at all but down and behind the
body and back in one smooth motion tracing out a figure eight.

-   *Illegal forms of pitching*
    -   "crow-hopping"
    -   "leaping"

#### "Modified" fastpitch style

-   *"Modified" windmill*


\- A "modified" fastpitch is identical to a "windmill" pitch except the
arm is not brought over the head in a full windmill motion, but instead
is brought behind the body (restricted back swing) and is then thrust
directly forward for the release.

#### Slowpitch style

The pitching distance is 50 feet. The pitch must be lofted in such a way
that it falls onto the plate in order for it to be a called strike (the
ball falls into the strike-zone instead of flying through). Strikeouts
are rare in slowpitch. Pitchers strategize to pitch the ball with a high
enough arc that the batter cannot hit a line-drive. The speed of the
pitches ranges from , resulting in plenty of reaction time.

-   *half windmill*


\- High-arc pitching technique

\- The pitch must be thrown with an arc between 6-12 feet high. If the
arc is not high enough, the umpire will call the pitch illegal.

### Types of pitches

#### Fastballs

The fastball is typically the first type of pitch a player will learn.

-   [Two-seam fastball](Two-seam_fastball "wikilink")
-   [Four-seam fastball](Four-seam_fastball "wikilink")

#### Breaking balls

-   Dropball
-   Riseball
-   Curveball
-   Screwball
-   Drop-curve
-   Rise-curve
-   Backdoor curve (the pitch starts out of the strike zone and curves
    back over the plate. Often, this pitch is thrown at a batters hip or
    hands with the intention of either moving them off the plate or
    inducing a foul ball)
-   Drop screw
-   Backdoor screw (the same as a backdoor curve except the ball spins
    in the opposite direction of a curveball)
-   Drop curve

#### Changeups

The changeup is the staple [off-speed
pitch](off-speed_pitch "wikilink"), usually thrown to look like a
fastball but arriving much slower to the plate. Its reduced speed
coupled with its deceptive delivery is meant to confuse the batter's
timing. There are a variety of grips and techniques a pitcher may use to
deliver a change up such as:

-   Flip (or "Back-hand flip") release
-   Stiff wrist release
-   Circle grip changeup
-   Knuckle grip changeup

##### Other off-speed pitches

-   Knuckle curveball
-   Floater


\- This is a pitch used by pitchers in the slow-pitch game. To throw the
floater accurately, pitcher holds the ball with just his or her
fingertips and does not let them touch the laces. Then comes straight up
with her hand and lets the ball go up to the 12-foot mark and come down.

-   Knuckleball

## Professional leagues

[Women's Professional
Fastpitch](Women_Professional_Fastpitch "wikilink") (WPF) is a
professional women's softball league in the United States and was
formerly the [National Pro Fastpitch](National_Pro_Fastpitch "wikilink")
(NPF) and then the [Women's Pro Softball
League](Women's_Pro_Softball_League "wikilink") (WPSL). The WPF league
launched in June 2022.[84][85]

The late 1970s to early 1980s marked a brief era for [men's professional
softball in the United
States](men's_professional_softball_in_the_United_States "wikilink").

## International competition

Softball is played in over a hundred countries around the world.[86] The
highest [governing body](sport_governing_body "wikilink") for the sport,
the [International Softball
Federation](International_Softball_Federation "wikilink") (ISF), has 113
member countries (excluding dependent territories).[87] The ISF holds
world championships in several categories.

The [Amateur Softball
Association](Amateur_Softball_Association "wikilink") is the National
Governing Body of Softball for the [United
States](United_States "wikilink") pursuant to the 1976 Amateur Sports
Act. Due to the popularity of the sport, there are a multitude of
governing bodies such as the [United States Specialty Sports
Association](United_States_Specialty_Sports_Association "wikilink"),
[International Softball
Congress](International_Softball_Congress "wikilink") and the [National
Softball Association](National_Softball_Association "wikilink").

The ISF holds the [ISF Women's World
Championship](ISF_Women's_World_Championship "wikilink") tournaments in
several categories. The tournament in each category is held every four
yearsâ€”two years from 2010. The most recent tournament was XII Women's
World Championship in June, 2010. All World Championships use a [Page
playoff system](Page_playoff_system "wikilink")[88] and are in
fastpitch. There are also several World Cups held at 4-year intervals in
different categories.[89][90]

[New Zealand](New_Zealand "wikilink") became the Men's World Champions
winning the world title in 2013. Prior to that, Australia won the World
Championship in 2009 and New Zealand had won the previous three
tournaments before that.[91]

In the Junior Men's World Champions in 2012, Team Argentina won the
world title.[92]

### Summer Olympics

In the [Women's Softball World
Championships](Women's_Softball_World_Championships "wikilink") the
United States is the most dominant team, having won three of the past
four [Olympic tournaments](Softball_at_the_Summer_Olympics "wikilink")
and the past seven World Championships.[93][94] The current Junior
Women's World Champion is the United States.[95]

Women's softball debuted at the [1996 Summer
Olympics](1996_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") and was removed from the
program following the [2008 Summer
Olympics](2008_Summer_Olympics "wikilink").[96] Softball and Baseball
were unable to have their sport included in the program at the
[2012](2012_Summer_Olympics "wikilink") and [2016 Summer
Olympics](2016_Summer_Olympics "wikilink"). In 2012 the heads of the
[International Softball and Baseball
Federations](International_Softball_and_Baseball_Federations "wikilink")
announced their united effort to be included in the program in 2020.
"The proposal calls for men's baseball and women's softball to be played
at a single venue during 7 to 10 days. Each tournament would feature
eight teams. Baseball and softball would be two disciplines under a
single sports banner. The proposal awaits formal endorsement from the
congress of both federations. Other sports which sought to be included
in the 2020 program, when only one spot is up for filling, were: karate,
roller sports, squash, sports climbing, wakeboard and wushu. The [IOC
executive board](International_Olympic_Committee "wikilink") were to
decide at their May meeting which sport to recommend for inclusion. The
final decision was made in a vote of the full IOC in Buenos Aires in
September 2013.[97] Softball and Baseball were re-included in the Summer
Olympic Games in Tokyo 2020, which was held in 2021.[98] The American
team had entered the gold metal match with an undefeated record, facing
Japan. United States was defeated 2-0 by Japan, naming Japan the Tokyo
2020 Softball Olympic Gold Medalists.[99]

### Participating countries and areas

#### New Zealand

[New Zealand](Black_Socks "wikilink") is the most successful nation at
men's world championship softball, having won their eighth title in
2019. The [New Zealand women's
team](New_Zealand_women's_national_softball_team "wikilink") have also
won a number of World Championship titles in the past. The game is
widely played in New Zealand and is the second most popular summer sport
behind [cricket](cricket "wikilink").

#### Australia

Softball is played in all states and territories in Australia and at all
levels of academic education. The game is widely promoted to maintain
[fitness](physical_fitness "wikilink"), health, personal achievements
and pleasure. Australia has produced several of the world's great men's
softball players, including Adam Folkard and Andrew Kirkpatrick, widely
considered all-time greats in men's softball. Australia has excellent
softball teams which are a reflection of its coaching, education and
training system.[100]

#### Japan

Japan has had a long tradition of softball which is played at all levels
in the country. Many high schools and colleges have sports programs
which include softball. Like baseball, softball in Japan is intensely
competitive. Japan's win over the United States at the 2008
Olympics[101] reflects the advanced level of play in this [East
Asian](East_Asia "wikilink") country.

#### China

Since the silver medal at the [Atlanta
Olympics](1996_Summer_Olympics "wikilink"), the Chinese have now made
softball a priority at all levels.[102] The game is played in most
schools and with a 1.3 billion population; the number of great players
is turning out to be a boon for China. The Chinese have frequently
toured the US and have now similar caliber coaching and training
programs.

#### Europe

Softball is played in almost every country in Europe, mainly fastpitch.
Every two years an open women's [European fastpitch
championship](ESF_Women's_Championship "wikilink") is held with over
twenty nationals teams. Italy and Netherlands are the best nations, and
both have an almost professional championship where athletes from the
US, Australia and China play. In the men's division eight to ten
national teams compete for the [European
championship](ESF_Men's_Championship "wikilink"), with the Czech
Republic, the Netherlands and Denmark leading the way.

#### United States

<figure>
<img src="2014_WCWS_Championship_Series_Game.jpg"
title="2014 Women&#39;s College World Series Championship Series" />
<figcaption>2014 <a href="Women&#39;s_College_World_Series"
title="wikilink">Women's College World Series</a> Championship
Series</figcaption>
</figure>

In America, there are more than 1,500 college softball teams spanning
five different levels: NCAA Division 1, Division 2, Division 3,
[NAIA](National_Association_of_Intercollegiate_Athletics "wikilink"),
and NJCAA.[103] There are 5 professional softball teams: the Aussie
Peppers, the Chicago Bandits, the Cleveland Comets, the California
Commotion, and the Canadian Wild.[104]

Competitive [fastpitch softball](fastpitch_softball "wikilink") for
girls is growing increasingly popular. All over the US, there are
thousands of teams that compete year-round at tournaments. During most
of these tournaments the biggest goal is not winning the tournament, but
attempting to get as many college coaches as possible to observe (a)
particular player or players. Competitive teams are now beginning around
eight years old, if not younger. Depending on the team they can travel
all over the United States or even out of the country such as to Canada,
the summer and fall for many weeks and days at a time.

There are many different sanctioning bodies of softball:
[USSSA](USSSA "wikilink"), ASA, ISA, NSA, WSL, USFA, Triple Crown and
SASL just to name a few. One of the biggest is the [Amateur Softball
Association](Amateur_Softball_Association "wikilink") (ASA). It is known
as the national governing body of softball, was established in 1933 and
has over 240,000 teams. The USSSA, founded in 1968 as the United States
Slo-Pitch Softball Association, but renamed in 1997 to the United States
Specialty Sports Association, is the only association that still has a
men's major slow-pitch program alive. Currently, the USSSA program is
run out of Viera, FL. The United States also has a competitive women's
softball team that competes in international tournaments. They
represented the US each time at the Olympics until softball was removed
from the Olympics.[105]

The Amateur Softball Association of America (founded 1933) is one of the
largest governing bodies for the game in the United States and sponsors
annual sectional and World Series championships. Other national and
regional governing bodies also exist, including the USSSA. The [World
Baseball Softball
Confederation](World_Baseball_Softball_Confederation "wikilink") (WBSC)
regulates rules of play in more than 110 countries, including the United
States and Canada; before the WBSC was formed in 2013, the
[International Softball
Federation](International_Softball_Federation "wikilink") (ISF) filled
this role.

The USA Softball Men's Fast Pitch National Team has won five World
Championships (1966, 1968, 1976, 1980 and 1988) and three other medals.
In the Pan-American Games, Team USA has made the finals in all seven
appearances at the Games when Men's Fast Pitch was played.[106]

## See also

-   [Women's Professional
    Fastpitch](Women's_Professional_Fastpitch "wikilink"), the main
    professional women's softball league in the United States
-   [Softball Australia](Softball_Australia "wikilink"), the governing
    body of softball in Australia
-   [Comparison of baseball and
    softball](Comparison_of_baseball_and_softball "wikilink")
-   [16-inch softball](16-inch_softball "wikilink")
-   [Rounders](Rounders "wikilink") â€“ a similar game from which baseball
    and softball are thought to have evolved
-   [Stoolball](Stoolball "wikilink") â€“ a similar game from which
    baseball and softball are thought to have evolved
-   [Tee-ball](Tee-ball "wikilink") â€“ a reformed version of baseball
-   [Baseball5](Baseball5 "wikilink") â€“ an international variant of
    softball involving only a rubber ball
-   [Dartball](Dartball "wikilink") â€“ a game of darts that uses rules
    similar to softball and is played on a large dartboard that
    resembles a softball field
-   [Safe haven games](Safe_haven_games "wikilink")
-   [Men's Professional Softball
    Leagues](Men's_Professional_Softball_Leagues "wikilink")
-   [Eddie Feigner](Eddie_Feigner "wikilink")
-   [Pekin Lettes](Pekin_Lettes "wikilink"), the oldest
    member-sanctioned ASA softball team in the United States
-   [Softball in Ireland](Softball_in_Ireland "wikilink")
-   [European Softball
    Federation](European_Softball_Federation "wikilink")
-   [NCAA Division I softball
    championship](NCAA_Division_I_softball_championship "wikilink")
